---
title: 'Quick September Update'
date: 2023-10-02
description: 'New Job and New Project'
---

I just wanted to give a quick updated that I changed jobs. I went from the full stack junior software engineer to test engineer I (basically junior level) for Forcepoint, a cyber security company located in Cork, Ireland. It was a difficult decision but having to travel from Cork to Dublin once a week was beginning to ware on me. I won't get into the politics of it all, I liked the job and the team and will miss them both. 

I also mentioned previously that I wanted to build a new langauge as a learning project. I am going down a similar road currently starting my own database. I figured this is actually a great project, especially for a langauge like Rust because it has the potential to touch many different aspects of programming, from dealing with the file system to creating an HTTP server, parallelism / concurrency, compression and encryption, data storage and indexing techniques, etc... really the sky is the limit. Plus, it'll probably have its own SQL like programming language to query data, so I will also get my own langauge. 

I also want to note my feeling about traveling to the office. I'll prbably add it to a blog sometime, but for employees such as myself, who solely sit at a desk and stare at a computer screen, there's no reason for me to go into an office. Commuting to and from the office adds to the stress of my day. Additionally, it increases the risk of serious injury or even death, getting knocked down by a bus or car also probably driving to an office location for no actual reason. The more people out and on the road, the more dangerous it is for everyone, include people who have to travel because their jobs cannot be performed remotely. Additionally, there's the cost of emissions on the environment. Even my e-scooter requires unnecessary charge to travel to an unnecessary location to perform the same work I can comfortably do from home. The office environment is also very distracting, people taking calls at their desks in an open-office layout can be heard from every corner of the office. You need a pair of noise cancelling headphones just to work. And contrary to most middle-management arguments, I find communication more difficult as now I have to find a meeting room, unplug my laptop from the monitors, just to have a call unless I want to be inconsiderate and have it at my desk. And all group meetings still have to be over video calls because some team members may be out of the office or even work in a different office location. 

Overall, forcing employees into the office seems unintuitive, irresponsible, and counterproductive, and just gives a very _controlling_ energy. If people want to go to the office for a more social workplace, that's great, and sure they should do that... socialize in person instead of work. However, I firmly believe it should be a choice, not a requirement. 

$\Box$ end of rant, thanks.
