---
title: 'JavaScript Date Format'
date: 2023-06-19
description: 'A thought about formatting dates using pure JavaScript.'
---

I'm currently building the **Skills** section, using JSON to keep track of all of the skills and making it easy to import the skills into my project. I considered for a second perhaps keeping all of my thoughts in a JSON as well, but before falling asleep last night remembered that sometimes my thoughts have code! I'll use this thought to demonstrate (hopefully).

An all to _common_ issue with JavaScript is date formatting. JS does not make it as simple as Python. I wanted to create a filename that had the date and time at the end to make unique files. I asked ChatGPT the easiest way to accomplish this, and here's the response:

```js
let today = new Date();
let year = today.getFullYear().toString();
let month = (today.getMonth() + 1).toString().padStart(2, '0');
let day = today.getDate().toString().padStart(2, '0');
let hours = today.getHours().toString().padStart(2, '0');
let minutes = today.getMinutes().toString().padStart(2, '0');
let seconds = today.getSeconds().toString().padStart(2, '0');

let fileName = `filename${year}${month}${day}${hours}${minutes}${seconds}.csv`;
console.log(fileName);
```

I then wrote something like "Thanks. Not sure why JavaScript doesn't have a built-in method for this." To which ChatGPT replied "The reason there isn't a built-in function for formatting dates exactly as you described is that date formatting can vary greatly depending on specific requirements and internationalization concerns." I thought that was really interesting.

Regardless of the reason, ChatGPT also offered me a more concise solution using Regex:

```js
let today = new Date();
let fileName = `filename${today.toLocaleString('en-US', { hour12: false, timeZone: 'UTC' }).replace(/[^\d]/g, '')}.csv`;
console.log(fileName);
```

I'll point anyone confused by Regex [to W3Schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_regexp_charset_not.asp), as they explain that the carrot in the square brackets means to search for things not in the brackets, and replace with an empty string. It's actually pretty clever. 