---
title: 'Levels of Programming Languages'
date: 2023-07-24
description: 'There are many different levels of programming languages.'
---

I was looking over a book called "The IDA Pro Book" and it mentions a few different levels of languages which I just want to list out.
+ According to this [Wikipedia Article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fifth-generation_programming_language), 5th generation programming languages are mostly constraint-based and logic programming langauges. Think of it like having the computer solve problems without a programmer. It was unfortunately a difficult task to create large programs with only constraints around a problem. 
+ There were also the [4th generation programming languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourth-generation_programming_language) that provide an additional layer of abstraction over 3rd gen. programs. And example per Wikipedia is SQL, which I think really sums up the idea. You don't write programs in SQL, but helpful queries, and all of the logic of diving into a database and extracting information is abstrated away from the user. 
+ There are also [3rd generation programming languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third-generation_programming_language), which as Wikipedia puts, are more machine-independent and programmer-friendly languages. However, they are generalized for computing and not highly focused like later generation langauges. This is where I'd tuck most major languages from C to Python, both compiled and interpreted. 
+ Before this came the [2nd generation programming languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second-generation_programming_language), which are also the assembly languages. These languages are specific to particular families of processors and environments.
+ And the [1st generation programming languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First-generation_programming_language) refers to the bytecode and machine languages. Which this whole thought started from looking into the difference between those two. Bytecode is actually an intermediate step before machine code. And machine code is the final code that the CPU processes. 